We're gonna be starting with our first
lesson which is on software modeling.
Instead of jumping right into
state machines and statecharts,
I really want to get down to the why
of state machines and statecharts.
And why you would actually want to use
these types of things when the way we've
been coding really didn't touch on
state machines or statecharts for
however many years we've been coding.
But why it's important today and
should have been important the entire
time we've been developers.
So the first question is
what is software modeling?
Software modeling in short is the art of
planning ahead, at least in my own words.
Really, if you look up
what software modeling is,
you see that it talks
a lot about abstractions.
And that's really what software
modeling is about is creating
a layer of abstraction that is one
degree separated from the code.
So the code is the implementation layer
and the model is the abstraction layer.
Now, there are many ways to model
software, one of the most popular ways and
useful in my opinion to do so,
is by using diagrams.
So, you might have started planning
software in the past by just grabbing
a whiteboard or maybe a pencil and
paper and drawing user flows or
flowcharts or diagrams like
entity relationship diagrams.
And just trying to understand what
your code is supposed to do and
accomplish at a higher level.
And so this essentially is
what software modeling is.
It's creating these abstract
models that we could code against.
However, something that I see way too
often in software development is jumping
straight into the code.
So we'll look at something like
a user interface of something we're
supposed to implement and
one of our first reactions says, okay,
let's start coding the user interface.
And then we start adding functionality on
top of that user interface by putting
a lot of logic and event handlers.
And if something needs to be different,
then we'll add an if statements.
And this is what quickly
creates spaghetti code.
So this is something that we really
wants to avoid just by planning ahead.
Now, one of the problems or I'd like to
call it a friction points with diagrams
is that diagrams aren't always
up to date with the code.
We might draw a really nice
architecture diagram or
a flowchart describing our code.
But once we starts to code, and
once new requirements come in,
it becomes double efforts to both update
the diagram and also update the code.
So that's what state machines and
statecharts are for.
And we're gonna talk about
that in a little bit.
But it allows you to do both
the software modeling upfront and
the actual implementation at the same
time, and do it in a way that you could
change the model and the implementation
and they could stay completely in sync.
And so this allows you to add new
features, change features, and
really understand your software
as a whole in one step.
Instead of doing it in multiple
steps of creating a diagram,
then code into the diagram, or
even skipping the diagram altogether,
which definitely not a good thing.
So state machines and
statecharts are part of what's
called events-driven-architecture.
And so event driven architecture is
about the fact that you have events
as a primitive, anything that
can happen to whatever app or
software that you're
programming is an event.
So something that a user does,
whether they click something, or
swipe something, or type something in,
all of those are events.
And by events I mean things that
happen which is the literal definition
of an event.
So when the user clicks a button,
that button clicked events is
an event that can be fed into
this model that we created and so
that model can decide what should
happen next based on that events.
Now keep in mind that events aren't just
something that originates from the user,
but events can also be something
that originates from the system or
other systems that are interacting
with your software itself.
For example, if we start fetching a
promise, then the user action of clicking
a button or pressing answer on a phone to
start fetching that promise is an events.
But also the promise resolving or
rejecting, those are also events and
they don't come from the user.
So it's important to keep in mind that
events encompass anything that can happen
in your application, and
not just things from the user.
So how do we specify
behavior in an application?
This is where things
like given-when-then and
test-driven developments come into play.
And these are really
loose specifications for
how we talk about how our
application is supposed to behave.
Now, let's actually talk about
the media player for a minute because I
want us to start creating a specification
on how it's supposed to work.
And you could see that specification if
you go into modeling and this readme.
We have a loose text description
of what is supposed to
happen in the app at each step.
Now I actually really
like given-when-then.
And that's because when we
represent a specification in this
given-when-then structure,
we already have all of the building
blocks we need to make a really
solid model of our application.
So, for example,
we say we have here a song when
loaded will start playing by default.
So, we could say that given, and
I will bump this up.
Let's just use large over here.
Given a song is not loaded yet.
When a song is loaded,
then the song should start playing.
So now we have everything here that
represents just the different building
blocks of our application, or at least
one small part of our application.
So, this given over here is a state,
is a precondition, but
it could also be represented
as a state in our application.
So we had this idea of
a song not being loaded yet.
And then this one represents an event.
So when a song is loaded, so
now we know that that loading, or
that loaded part is an events that
can happen in the application.
Then the song should start playing.
So now we have a different states.
If the states aren't changing,
then this then part is going to
be exactly the same as the given.
But user specifications usually
specify that the state of
the application does change.
So we have a bunch of these user stories.
The user could also play or
pause the song and
we could translate that to, for
example, given the song is playing,
when the user presses pause,
then the song should be paused.
So now we have our playing states,
our paused state, and
the events of clicking the pause
button to pause the song.
So, that's why specifying behavior is so
useful and
this is why we typically do this
using user stories because it gives
us all of the building blocks
of specifying our application.
>> So is modeling making a list of all
possible events that can occur in an app?
>> Yes, exactly.
Like I was talking about before,
typically when we start coding an app,
we start coding with the user interface
and just start shoving events in there.
So now that we're thinking in
an event-first architecture,
event-first really describes that
there's a bunch of events happening,
and our application is going
to react to those events.
But it can be really tempting to put all
of the logic inside of event handlers for
this.
And this typically isn't really the best
way to go especially as the app scales up
in features.
For example, you might be putting fetch
logic inside of a form submit handler.
Or you might be having like defensive
conditions and if statements inside
of a click handler that determines what
should happen when this button is clicked.
For example,
you might say if the form is loading and
the submit button is clicked again,
then we might have an if statement,
like if, if is loading, then do nothing,
otherwise start fetching the data.
And this makes the behavior implicit.
It makes the behavior such that we're
describing the application in terms of
when this event happens, do this, but
also keep in mind these conditions.
And so now instead of thinking in terms of
like the entire state of the application.
Or thinking in terms of okay,
let's have an event just do something and
if that's not doing the exact
thing we want it to,
add more if statements in there so
that we get to do the behavior we want.
And so that's why I encourage
you to take a step back into
a state-first approach instead.
And so I'm going to demonstrate
what we mean by this.
And this is also going to get into
state machines and statecharts as well.
So first, when we look at this,
this specification,
we have a state-first
approach already over here.
We say when the song is loaded,
then the song should start playing.
But we have this precondition over here
too, given a song is not loaded yet.
Now, we can make another user
story that says, for example,
given a song is playing,
when the pause button is pressed,
then the song should be paused.
All right, so this specification allows us
to prevent any unintentional behavior of,
for example, if the pause button
is pressed when the song is
already paused,
if you have a pause button visible.
Or if the play button is visible
while the song is already playing and
the user happens to press it again.
Some unintended behavior might happen
if the exact same button is pressed
more than once and we're attaching
logic to the event handler instead of
considering a state-first approach.
And so that's why this given part of
the given-when-then statements are so
important.
And so like I was saying,
this gets into what state machines and
statecharts really are.